---
layout: weAutPost
title: A comprehensive German dictionary for Eclipse
bigTitle: eclipse dictionary
date:   2013-08-05
categories: eclipse German dictionary 
lang: en
dePage: ./eclipDic_de.html 
copyrightYear: 2013
revision: 21
reviDate: 2021-01-07
date: 2020-10-01
itemtype: "http://schema.org/BlogPosting"
isPost: true
commentIssueId: 1
commentShare: ./eclipDic_de.html
---
{% include referenceLinks.txt %}
If your HTML, XML and JavaDoc or Doxygen is to some extend German (and not
just English) Eclipse’s spell checker<!--more-->
gets more bothering than a help. Here
the developer gets a comprehensive German dictionary containing some
26&nbsp;900 word forms including OO, Java and process control.

### Get and install
Download: [weinert-automation.de/software/eclipse/de_DE.dic](https://weinert-automation.de/software/eclipse/de_DE.dic).<br />
Store the file where you like, e.g. at: `C:\util\eclipse\dropins`

Install in Eclipse as “User defined directory” at: `Window>Preferences>General>Editors>Texteditors>spelling`.

Hint: Eclipse probably requires write access for its users to the file
`C:\util\eclipse\dropins\de_DE.dic`.     
On Windows this is done in the Explorer or by cacls in the shell. Under Linux,
you get there by something like
```powershell
    sudo cp '/where/it/is/de_DE.dic' '/usr/lib/eclipse/dropins'
    sudo chmod 777 /usr/lib/eclipse/dropins/de_DE.dic
```
Hint 2: Of all Eclipse editors the “Text Editor” has the best spell checking integration. So it should be used from time to time if your 
`.java, .xml, .php, .html` or whatever contains a considerable amount
of readable text.

### Structure and content
The most simple form of a .dic file for Eclipse is used here
- one word respectively word form per line
- no repetitions, not even for just first capital letter<br />
  If “wandern” is contained, Eclipse will accept “Wandern” anyway. Hence,
  the [Frame4J][f4j_en]{: class="bbi"} tool 
  UCopy (option -eclipDic) will drop the upper case doublet.
- no (abbreviation) dots at the end (Eclipse accepts “etc.” in the text by a .dic entry “etc”)
- no hyphenated words<br />
  Eclipse checks “Baden-Württemberg” against the two words “baden” and “Württemberg”.
  Baden is also a verb (to bathe), hence the lower case variant, only.
- not sorted (Eclipse seems to sort on load anyway. Other information?)<br />
  &nbsp; 

### Modify or make it yourself
[Frame4J][f4j_en]{: class="bbi"}'s tool UCopy will bring a text file to this form by
```powershell
    java UCopy source.txt -eclipDic -v destination.dic
```
- doing those transformations
- separate word in single lines
- delete a trailing dot
- delete single letters and doublets (also those 
  distinguished by first capital only)
- delete words containing digits or upper case characters only.

This tool greatly simplifies the making and adding to such .dic files. 
Without bothering about line structure or word forms already contained one
just adds correctly (!) spelled words and lets UCopy with -eclipdic option
crunch it.