---
layout: weAutPost
title: Out of Typo3
bigTitle: Dispose of Typo3
permalink: /:title.html
date:   2019-11-03
categories: WWW CSM Typo3 Markdown Jekyll
lang: en
dePage: leaveTypo3_de.html
copyrightYear: 2019
revision: 3
reviDate: 2020-10-06
itemtype: "http://schema.org/BlogPosting"
isPost: true
commentIssueId: 4
commentShare:
---

Typo3 is a powerful content management system (CMS) in wide spread use. It
encompasses user administration, front end<!--more--> and back end. It enforces design
and layout rules. All is held on the server in a data base system. 
Additionally Typo3 needs PHP and a web server (Apache e.g.), requiring some
freedom of con&shy;figuration there.

Typo3's advantages are well documented. It is always emphasised that authors 
would need no knowledge on neither web technologies nor languages (HTML, CSS,
JS etc.).

## Why should anybody want to leave Typo3?

Despite its enormous popularity there are cases of dislike and reluctance by
users. Main reasons are
 - too less freedom by administrative or programmed restrictions via layouts,
   templates and designs. One can not, for example, get rid of navigation
   bars not adequate for the page content. Multilingual pages with "switch
   language buttons" are not feasible, if that's not chewed for from the 
   beginning.
 - no (real) test preview
 - no version control (worth the name)
 - page authors just can't get into gear with the back end.
 
The last and prevalent reason to leave may seem astonishing. Often, the 
assertion of sheer simplicity for page authors was the main reason (or
pretence) for introducing Typo3. The back end can be configured or programmed
in great freedom -- and hardly two different installations are found with the
same beck end / editor behaviour.

So voluminous and good text books for Typo3 administrators / programmers are
found but nothing comparable for the poor web authors. As a substitute, after
going Typo3 some institutions offer multipart trainings for page authors, 
of almost the size of a good basic course for HTML and CSS. In the latter 
something of common value and with good text book support would have been 
learned.

Additionally, fearing the complications of installing Typo3, institutions
use external service providers therefore. In the long run this may cause
additional costs, inflexibility and problems with responsibility and delays.

## Away, but whereto?

If you think you must leave "Whereto" is the hardest question. In the given
circumstances the new solution has to be "better" in the sense of less pain.
Basically, the posibilities are
 1. another CSM newly set up (with PHP, Database system and back end)
 2. directly made static HTML (CSS, JS)
 3. generating a static site using simple page languages, like e.g. markdown
 
Goal 1, i.e. again a CMS, no matter if new Typo3 installation, Wordpress or
consorts is often considered a no go after a painful journey and is not
considered here as alternative. If, nevertheless, going that way looking for
and testing tools for conversion or import and export is crucial -- when not
wanting to newly set up a tiny site.

Goal 2 means maintaining directly static HTML, CSS und JS. With adequate 
tools, syntax support and version control (with Eclipse and SVN e.g.) 
astonishing good and fluent work is possible alone or in a small team.

Especially, when wanting authors providing or maintaining content with 
(almost) no encounter with HTML, one will go for goal 3. One approach is 
generating a static site with Jekyll from pages written in Markdown. The best
way thereto is via a complete, consistent -- repaired -- static web site.

Goal 3 necessitates goal 2 in most cases, avoiding the ongoing maintenance
of HTML pages.
  
## Go static -- goal 2

When having the complete (CSM) web site as static HTML and FTPing it to the 
same server / domain one is rid of Typo 3 (and of DBMS and of PHP) and no 
visitor will see a difference putting -- except, perhaps, better performance.

Fortunately, to get a complete static copy of the Typo3 generates site on
your development workstation you neither need special conversion tools nor 
DBM or administrative access. One installs the free tool WinHTTrack.exe -- 
as of now version 3.49-2 -- and runs it. Important settings:
 - Local structure: site structure
 - rewrite links: Relative URI / Absolute URI
 - do not obey robot.txt
 
The result should show up by a file://-URL locally -- oops we've got local
test preview -- and after uploading to the server one is, as said, ready.
Well, not really.

In most cases, on a closer look, the whole delivery from Typo3 is a giant 
mess with horrible directory structure and disgusting file names as well as
a load full of redundant unused things. Using an Eclipse and bulk search 
and replace, this should be cleared and honed step by step. This will be hard
work but rewarding in many respects; in the end one has a clear view of the 
site's structure and layout.

And when on it, one should start by collecting style sheets, scripts and 
important images in this structure (from site root).
```
├── assets
|   ├── css
|   ├── images
|   └── js
```
That's customs and conventions with Jekyll.

## Dr. Jekyll's markdown

After having gained that order, consistency and insight on can switch to
generating a static site with Jekyll and Markdown with relative ease. The 
background and installation is very well documented. And when using Github
server pages -- perhaps for a blog like this one -- one has all that
anyway. 

The whole thing works as well without Github and without having blog. And 
the best of it is the local preview function. 

The Transformation is simple and can be made fluently in small steps, as
Jekyll

 &nbsp; a) just copies all things being statically present 1:1 and <br />
 &nbsp; b) a .html-page being syntactically correct is also a syntactically
    correct template (in Jekyll's template language Liquid).
    
Such template makes per se no sense as just generating this single page. But,
when finding n .html pages being equal except for title and a content block,
one easily can convert them to one template plus n markdown (.md) files. 
When coping with that the ice is broken.

## Dr. Jekyll's site generator

The command   
``` 
  jekyll serve              or  
  bundle exec jekyll serve  
 ```
depending on installation generates the static site in the directory _site
where it can be viewed from by jekyll's build in web server at    
&nbsp; &nbsp; http://127.0.0.1:4000/     
Any changes in templates, assets or markdown
automatically regenerates the site in directory _site.

That is real local preview. And, when content with the result, just ftp the 
content of directory _site to your web server. With Github server pages you
would just commit and push and Github's jekyll will generate the site changes 
on its server. But, as said, the whole thing works with normal web servers 
which one can upload files to, too.  
See also the post on 
[Jekyll Tipps](/twoJekyllTricks.html "Two Jekyll Tricks").
